I don't see any threats to inference with the EO--lawsuits are regular APA lawsuits, my only point was that the EO gives both agencies and commenters a reason to use the phrase "environmental justice," but I should be careful to be really clear about that since it got a lot of attention (in part because it appeared in the intro rather than the methods section, as it will in future drafts).     Given your reply, I would really downplay the EO – bury it somewhere in the “testing the hypotheses” section.  I promise that it will confuse your audience.     My schedule is fairly flexible if you want to toss out a time that works well for you.
Thanks!Devin      On Wed, Feb 17, 2021 at 4:35 PM SUSAN W YACKEE <yackee@wisc.edu> wrote:Hi!     See below.     Thanks! Susan     
     
Date: Tuesday, February 16, 2021 at 9:21 AM
     
      Thanks Susan,Yes, I should merge with OIRA and think about what OIRA review would mean for responsiveness to comments. Do you think that salience (beyond the number of comments) is an important part of the theory here?      Well, I don’t know – you mentioned significance a lot during the presentation via number of comments but controlling for what elites view as a significant rule might help to clarify the estimates.     Generally speaking having additional measures that vary at the rule-level would be helpful to the analyses, if only for sensitivity testing.     Technically, I think the     answer to your question about the EO, is     yes, courts only assess the 12898 analyses when the agency brings it up. If by citing it they     incurred legal obligations, that would be a strong incentive not to cite it, but I don't think that is what is going on here because "compliance" with the EO is never the issue (I may have used the wrong words here). My understanding is that compliance with the text of executive order is not what courts assess regardless of whether the agency brought it up.  Rather, the legal issue is whether disparate     impacts are     "relevant" to the     rule and the agency's reasoned analysis. The     EO and comments raising the EO just help make the case that these concerns and data are relevant when courts assess compliance with NEPA and the APA.     For example, courts have criticized “bare-bones conclusion that [a minority or low-income population] would not be disproportionately harmed” and that failure to provide “meaningful discussion” of the disparate impacts of a rule “points to the agency’s failure to ‘consider an important aspect’ of the effects of the Rule.”     I should read more about these cases, but the adlaw people writing about this seem to think that the issue is really about the extent to which disparate impacts are relevant and reviewable. I have not read anything about perverse incentives related to the EO.      Well, this is complicated!     And, I’m still not sure that I understand it.      But, I do think that you need a clearer answer for whether public commenters can sue (on procedural grounds) based on this EO, stating, for instance, the rule should be revoked b/c the agency didn’t take my EJ comment seriously and EO 12989 requires them to do so.     If they can sue on this basis, then what you are explaining becomes much more about the EO AND its effects on rulemaking.     If they can’t sue, then I think that the threats to inference – raised by the EO part – are reduced significantly.     Then, it is back to the “normal” APA process – where suits can always be raised if a commenter raises an issue and the agency fails to adequately address it in the Final Rule [completely separate from the EO].       I'd love to discuss the publication strategy for this one if you have any time in the next few weeks.      Of course!     While I have you, did you get a timeline and update out to your full dissertation committee?     Please confirm.     Thanks!     Devin     On Mon, Feb 15, 2021 at 5:28 PM SUSAN W YACKEE <yackee@wisc.edu> wrote:Hi!     I thought that the presentation went really well today – your audience was engaged!     One follow up question – what about using data from OIRA and the Unified Agenda to provide some additional control measures in the analyses – esp. to sort out salience?     On the EO piece, am I reading the below correctly that the agency has to be the one to bring up the EO first in order to have court review possible?     Thanks! Susan     
     
Date: Monday, February 15, 2021 at 4:01 PM
     
     Hi Susan,
This is really helpful. A few quick responses:

I am not yet sure if this will be a JMP. I was thinking that I would send it out in time to get an R&R by the job market. It could end up being the best JMP for environmental policy/politics jobs, which are growing and I have a good shot, but it employs radically simpler methods than my main analysis. Thus, there is a tension between sending it out with the current methods and making it *the* exemplar of the larger project.

On your very helpful detailed notes:Points taken on simplicity and rulemaking, I'll revise it out of the intro.Yes, I need to clarify the EO part--Agencies are open to APA and NEPA lawsuits based on their EO12898 analysis being arbitrary and capricious, not for failing to comply with the EO, but failure to comply with the APA and NEPA in how they addressed the EO--this is hard to describe succinctly for a general audience.Yes, lots more cites and theory to add and restructuring points are good.I did not intend to say that well-resourced groups don't dominate. I'll try to clarify.Cutting the hypothesis about the general level of public attention would allow me to more cleanly say "I find support for all my hypotheses." However, the model is testing whether public attention matters, and there are compelling intuitions both ways. I sort of want to get credit for testing them, even though it turned out that one intuition is right for one kind of policy change (adding EJ analysis) and the other was right for the other kind (changing EJ analysis published in the draft). I am not sure what to do about this.I don't know what to do about "distributive"--it comes from Lowi, and it is jargon, but I'm not sure what else to call it.I can put Data and Methods under "Testing the Theory." In this case, most of the tests are very two-tailed in the sense that I think there are good intuitions on both sides. I could frame it as competing hypotheses, but that would increase the number of hypotheses.I could toss out data before 2005, but I'm not seeing any systematic bias in it. It is incomplete and leads estimates for the Clinton years to be very uncertain. I hate to toss out good data just to avoid having to explain that, but maybe it is worth it.I cut a bunch of the descriptive figures; good advice. Though, Barry read the version after I cut the     figures and asked for more. I think I can satisfy them by pointing them to the appendix, but I should keep thinking about which descriptive figures are important.Yes, who is mobilizing is not essential to the analysis, but it is essential to the interpretation of the results. If I am going to suggest that "EJ advocates/activists/...." seem to have an impact, I need to define who these people/orgs are and what they are up to. Maybe I can do this in the discussion rather than the data section? I am really not sure how to handle this. (The alternative is to just say "commenters" but that means dropping the activist/movements/representation framing).     I agree that examples should be chosen to fit the frame wherever that lands. I'm not attached to the Mercury example. I have 5 potential outcomes and would ideally have an example of each:EJ neither in comments, PR, nor FREJ in Comments onlyEJ in FR onlyEJ in Comments and FR onlyEJ in PR, Comments, RuleIt is a bit of a trick to mix the qual and quant here, but both seem important given how unfamiliar people are with the topic.     Thanks again for the careful read!Devin     Devin Judge-Lord     715.204.4287      On Fri, Feb 12, 2021 at 2:05 PM SUSAN W YACKEE <yackee@wisc.edu> wrote:Hi Devin,I finished the paper this AM.     I have a bunch of feedback – there is some really good stuff in this paper and now it is matter of reformulating and recasting it to make it shine.     This may seem grueling – as I know that you’ve worked on this paper for some time.     However, the work will be worth it in the end.     I’ll look forward to hearing the feedback on Monday too.     Have a good weekend, Susan     I’ll lead with a few questions:     Do you see this as your job market paper?     #1 matters for the framing.     If it is not your job market paper, then you might want to frame this article more on discourse and ideas in the policymaking process and less on activist movements [b/c you should have the activist movements framing for your “big” paper, whichever that becomes].     You probably knew that already, but it didn’t come to me until I read the full thing.     In this case, you’d need to lead with ideas, discourse, framing in public policymaking and why it matters.     I thought of Stone and Schneider and Ingraham as I was reading the back-end of the piece, for instance.     Here are a few of my thoughts as I read the paperP1 – never lead with rulemaking; it doesn’t publish well as a lead.     Lead with your idea.     P1 – way too complicated.     Need to simplify to decide what the core theoretical contribution of the piece is.     At present, the first few pages are too much about how you are going to test it (i.e. venue-rulemaking, topic-EJ, data etc).     One of my advisors once challenged me to not mention rulemaking until page 9 (i.e. in the data and methods section).     I’m not saying do that – however, think about that challenge.     Poli sci research is about the theoretical idea first.P2 – the part about EJ being an distinctive phrase is excellent.     This goes in the data and methods section, but it should be emphasized more as a conscious research design choice that allows you to better apply these methods.P2 – the EO piece is confusing to me.     These usually aren’t a matter of court review, which is good for you.     [Or, can they sue on this EO as you say?     Sorry—I should look it up!]. You’ll want to be more explicit about the implications of this for your research design – does it create a threat to validity to your findings (esp. the most compelling ones – which occurs when EJ is not mentioned in NPRM but mentioned in FR)?     Put differently, does having the EO confuse the testing here of a “when do new ideas make it into the policy process framing”?P3 – theory section is not really a theory section yet.     If you want the discourse/ideas framing for the paper (and not the protest framing) then here is where you dig into that literature…using numerous citations and showing off the importance of the topic to the reader.     Then, you’ll get to rulemaking.     Make sure to explicitly say what Balla finds and other papers that may be close to what you’re doing.     P4 – You tell us that rulemaking is dominated by well-resourced groups but on earlier pages you said that this was wrong.     Instead, I think that you mean that the majority of rules have very few comments, but the majority of comments come on just a few rules and these are mostly spurred by mobilizing organizations.     [This is a bit of a unit of analysis issue…..which will not be clear to your reader unless you clearly tell her/him.]P6-7 – I’d say that there are too many hypotheses.     Can you cut the ones on just the # of comments?     These don’t have much to do with the argument and lead to problems later in explaining your findings.     P6 – I’m not warm on the “distributive” language throughout.     Each time I read it, I think – I’m not exactly sure what he means.     When you can get rid of jargon, do so.P8 – You have a data section, but youneed a “Testing the Model” or “Testing the Argument” or “Testing the Theory”.     This section will introduce readers to the data (i.e. what data, what agencies and why, what years), variables (exactly what is measured and why), and methods (quickly stating what analysis technique is the best approach).     In your case, this section will introduce EJ and what this distinctive phrase does to assist you in your research design strategy.     **All** of your papers going forward should have a “Testing the Theory” section.     [I realize that this one is part of the dissertation…..so maybe it doesn’t make as much sense, but if you presenting it separately, like you are at APW, then this info must be in there.]       P8 – I’m confused by the reference to data before 2005 being less complete.     You should explain in text OR perhaps simply start the analysis in 2005.     Always better to not have to explain – so I’d start in 2005 if that’s a natural break.P9 – There are too many figures in the paper – reduce and simply.     [Figure 2 has different # on the x-axis….a pet peeve of mine – harmonize or explain.]P11 – I’m not sure that “who” is mobilizing is relevant to this article, if the framing is around ideas/discourse making its way into policymaking.     Save this for another paper on advocacy.     Commenter race may be an exception – given its ties to EJ – but you’ll need to think of how this is or is not central to your hypotheses.P15 – The mercury example doesn’t fit at present.     Maybe it could in a future version – but nail down the contribution first AND only include if it furthers our understanding of that contribution.     And, I’m not sure what the first sentence means – “Fundamental ….”  P 15 - For footnote 3, try not to include footnotes like this.     This type of footnote is explaining a research methods choice – so it should be in the research methods section.     Footnotes should only be used sparely and then for short clarifying matters.     P17 – I would recommend recasting the “results” section around your new, limited hypotheses.     Note – I don’t think that you ever show “how” agencies address EJ; instead you have two ways of capturing “whether”.           
Date: Thursday, February 11, 2021 at 3:17 PM
     
      Hi!     Great reactions – esp. on #2, here is where your knowledge of the terrain is much better than mine.     My reactions to your thoughts below are two-fold.     First,simplify, simplify, simplify.     You can get to caveats and complexities as the paper proceeds (esp. in the analysis section).     But, the abstract and first two-three pages needs to be very simple.     Of course, they also need to be accurate.     The simplicity in those pages will boost significantly the publication chances of the piece.     You need to move the complexities to the side for your readers across the first few pages.     This will let you drill down on the contribution…..let your reader have a chance to soak it in and why the questions/topic matters AND then add the complexities later.     Write clearly in the abstract and intro – so that even your “smart aunt” could readily follow.     This is hard to do and can really only be done after one has an excellence sense of the full project and its contributions.     Second, if you want to proceed with an abstract like the one that I propose below, then the paper needs to be reorganized to reflect the abstract.     What do I mean by this?     In particular, the first paragraph of the intro AND the first short section in the lit review are about the general issue – which is activism, protest, and its connection to lobbying.       This has nothing to do with bureaucracy or rulemaking.     The second and third paragraphs of the intro AND the second section of the lit review then can introduce rulemaking as a policy venue and what we know about amass protest during rulemaking – via petitions and commenting.Explain commenting (your readers and reviewers will not all be rulemaking scholars – at least that’s the hope).     Your theory section remains general to movements (or movement in rulemaking—if necessary, but the more general the better).     Then, in your data and methods section, is the first time you really get into EJ – and you explain why this is a good “case” for your theory testing.     Then results.     Here is where you make sure to clearly provide evidence on the hypotheses and where you add the nuance and the complex findings and caveats.     Conclusions – start very broad, again – with the fact that understanding the impact of political movements is critical to scholars.     Then, drill down on how your contributions advance our knowledge.     Add disclaimers at the very end and suggest them for future research.      Again, I’ll have more feedback later.     Thanks! Susan     
     
Date: Thursday, February 11, 2021 at 11:39 AM
     
      Hi Susan,     Thank you for that. I like it. My abstract got a little unwieldy and this is more to the point.      I think this framing is good, and I'm going to adopt it. I do want to work in three caveats (which I think can be spun as important additional     findings)1. Despite the significant relationship between EJ comments and policy response, agencies still responded to these comments less than 50% of the time, so it is not so rosy of a story for the movement.     2. "activists" is a complex     term that can mean different things with different substantive and normative implications for policymaking--groups organizing pressure campaigns are sometimes the same ones organizing protests and sometimes not. Overall, I find that major national advocacy groups are using this rhetoric for fairly generic purposes more than the place-based groups who started the movement. It's a mix of cooperation and co-option, and it matters for how we should interpret policies responding to "activists."3. The effects being "conditional on" large-scale public pressure operate differently in getting agencies to address EJ at all (in this case, more comments help) vs. change their EJ analysis (in this case, more comments indicated more salient policies that are less likely to change).     