https://regulatorystudies.columbian.gwu.edu/sites/g/files/zaxdzs3306/f/downloads/Reports/GW%20Reg%20Studies%20-%20Mass%2C%20Computer-Generated%2C%20and%20Fraudulent%20Comments%20%28Draft%20Report%204.2.21%29%20SBalla%20et%20al.pdf


"The shift over the last two decades to a digital process, in which participants submit
comments via the Internet, has made commenting easier. Expanding the ability to participate in an
important governance process is an overwhelmingly positive change. Rulemaking has long been
criticized as an insiders’ game, invisible to the general public, with modest levels of participation,
almost entirely by organizations rather than individuals. But, although online participation has the
potential to increase the quantity and diversity of participation, it has also inadvertently opened
the floodgates to mass comment campaigns" (p. 5)

The adoption of e-rulemaking by agencies, along with broader associated technological
developments, has led to fundamental changes in notice-and-comment rulemaking. What was once
a paper process that was difficult to access and generally dominated by a small number of repeat
players has become more visible and therefore more accessible. The elimination of barriers to
participation has brought with it meaningful change. Much of this is for the better. The move online
has increased participation, made for better-informed agencies, made rulemaking more
transparent, and provided commenters, stakeholders, and rulewriters within the agencies with
easier access to materials in the docket. It has also enabled certain forms of commenting that lack
obvious benefits and that may do affirmative harm. (p. 9)

In a relatively small number of rulemakings, agencies receive an unusually large number
of comments (e.g., hundreds or thousands, as opposed to the few dozen, or fewer, that are
typical).
Hearing of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations and the Subcommittee on Regulatory
Affairs and Federal Management, S. Homeland Sec. & Governmental Affs. Comm., October 24, 2019 (statement of
Dominic J. Mancini, Deputy Administrator, Off. of Info. & Regul. Affs.) (noting that internal analysis “suggested that
about 80 percent of proposed rules receive 10 or fewer comments”)



Cary Coglianese, Citizen Participation in Rulemaking: Past, Present, and Future, 55 DUKE L.J. 943, 945 (2006)
(“participation in rulemaking is one of the most fundamental, important, and far-reaching of democratic rights”). 

Stuart Shapiro, When Do Agencies Change
Their Proposed Rules (Nov. 10, 2007) (presented at APPAM: Association for Public Policy Analysis & Management
Conference) (unpublished manuscript), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1026066 (finding that
fewer than 10% of rulemakings received more than 100 comments); John M. de Figueiredo, E-Rulemaking: Bringing
Data to Theory at the Federal Communications Commission, 55 DUKE L.J. 969 (2006). Other agency actions that are
subject to public commenting follow as similar pattern. An analysis focusing on the fifty draft guidance documents
published for public comment by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) from 2011-2014 found that just eight
received more than 5,000 comments, with five exceeding 40,000 comments. Nicholas R. Parrillo, Should the Public
Get to Participate Before Federal Agencies Issue Guidance? An Empirical Study, 71 ADMIN. L. REV. 57, 97-98 (2019)
[hereinafter Parrillo, Should the Public Get to Participate]

The more common term is “fraudulent comment.” For a more complete discussion of possible labels, including
“fraudulent,” “fake,” “pseudonymous,” “fabricated,” “inauthentic,” and “misattributed,” see Michael Herz,
Fraudulent Malattributed Comments in Agency Rulemaking, 42 CARDOZO L. REV. 1, 10-12 (2020)

In the 1995-96
rulemaking in which it first asserted regulatory authority over tobacco cigarettes, the Food and
Drug Administration received over 700,000 paper comments, many of which were identical, socalled “postcard comments.”48

48 Food and Drug Admin., Regulations Restricting the Sale and Distribution of Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco to
Protect Children and Adolescents, 61 Fed. Reg. 44396, 44418 (1996). As the FDA described it:
Altogether, the agency received more than 700,000 pieces of mail, representing the views of nearly
1 million individuals. Most of the submissions were form letters or post cards. The agency identified
more than 500 different types of form letters. Others were petitions with sometimes hundreds of
signatures. More than 95,000 submissions expressed individual comments on the 1995 proposed
rule, including more than 35,000 from children who were overwhelmingly supportive.
Id.

49 Beth Simone Noveck, The Electronic Revolution in Rulemaking, 53 EMORY L.J. 433 (2004) (expressing concern
that new technology might open the floodgates to “notice-and-spam” rulemaking). 

Yet orchestrating a campaign to mail in masses of comments was much more burdensome
and expensive than it is now. Once it became possible to comment with the click of a button, mass
participation, both spontaneous or orchestrated, became much more straightforward as did the
potential for duplicative comments.49



Often, the most useful information for an agency will be technical or operational. This type
of information includes scientific or engineering studies, relevant data, analysis about how well
the proposed regulatory change will address the problem being solved, what kind of changes
compliance will require, or legal or policy analysis. Technical or operational information
empowers agency decision makers to anticipate the consequences of the choices they face in the
design of regulations.

A second type of information concerns conclusions drawn by stakeholders or members of
the public concerning the desirability of a rulemaking.




There is a debate
among administrative law scholars concerning the extent to which agencies should consider
commenter preferences. Cynthia Farina, for example, has argued that the deliberative and technical
nature of the rulemaking process makes consideration of pure expressions of preference
inappropriate, especially if they are not informed or representative.50 Nina Mendelson, by contrast,
has argued that expressions of preference can and should be considered by agencies, at least in
some contexts, because agencies are often called on to “decide values and policy questions left
unresolved by their authorizing statutes.” 51 For Mendelson, concerns about representativeness, for example, must be balanced against the drawbacks of ignoring the sentiments of those who have
taken the time to comment. 

Cynthia R. Farina et al., Rulemaking vs. Democracy: Judging and Nudging Public Participation That Counts, 2
MICH. J. ENVTL. & ADMIN. L. 123, 137–39 (2012).
51 Nina A. Mendelson, Rulemaking, Democracy, and Torrents of E-Mail, 79 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 1343, 1350–51
(2011) [hereinafter Mendelson, Rulemaking, Democracy]; see also Nina A. Mendelson, Should Mass Comments 
Count?, 2 MICH. J. ENVTL. & ADMIN. L. 173, 1818 (2012) (“[A]gency officials might pay attention to large volumes
of comments, for example, to help gauge public resistance or anticipate significant opposing views.”). This debate
tracks, in certain respects, the scholarly conversation on whether courts should accept “political reasons” as
justifications for agency decisions. Jodi L. Short, The Political Turn in American Administrative Law: Power,
Rationality, and Reasons, 61 DUKE L.J. 1811 (2012); Nina A. Mendelson, Disclosing “Political” Oversight of Agency
Decision Making, 108 MICH. L. REV. 1127 (2010); Kathryn A. Watts, Proposing a Place for Politics in Arbitrary and
Capricious Review, 119 YALE L.J. 2 (2009). More broadly, the debate about the appropriate role for consideration of
expressions of preference in public comments tracks alternative views about the legitimate foundations of
administrative decision making. See generally Vanessa Duguay, Views or Votes: The Challenge of Mass Comments
in Rulemaking, 26 GEO. MASON L. REV. 625 (2018); Steven P. Croley, Public Interest Regulation, 28 FLA. ST. U. L.
REV. 7, 7 (2000); Mark Seidenfeld, A Civic Republican Justification for the Bureaucratic State, 105 HARV. L. REV.
1511 (1992).
52 See Stuart M. Benjamin, Evaluating E-Rulemaking: Public Participation and Political Institutions, 55 DUKE L. J.
893, 906–907 (2006) (“Many statutes leave no room for an agency to consider public sentiment.”). 








"Further, for rules that result in a mass
comment response, agencies face a range of difficult questions (discussed in more detail below)
concerning the representativeness of the pool of commenters and the role of intermediary groups
that conduct mass comment campaigns. " ( p. 14)


There is a considerable body of behavioral and social scientific research on the causes of
positive legitimacy.58 One important thread of that literature concerns perceptions of “procedural
fairness” and the components of decision-making processes that tend to enhance or undermine
those perceptions. In a recent OECD report by E. Allan Lind and Christiane Arndt summarizing
some of this literature, the authors identify “[t]hree general elements of process . . . [that] stand out
in terms of their impact on whether a citizen will feel fairly treated in his or her interactions with
government [. . .]: voice, polite and respectful treatment, and explanations.”59 The authors define
voice as “a chance [for affected people] to present their views” along with “some indication that
the input was actually given consideration.” (pg. 15)
9 E. Allan Lind & Christiane Arndt, Perceived Fairness and Regulatory Policy: A Behavioural Science Perspective
on Government-Citizen Interactions 20 (OECD Regulatory Policy Working Paper No. 6, 2016). 


"Observers reasonably worry that
computer-generated comments submitted at scale could drown out comments from real persons,
create confusion on relevant issues, or prompt an agency to ignore even legitimate comments" (pg. 16)
2 See, e.g., Fake It Till They Make It, supra note 2, at 11 (statement of Paulina Gonzalez-Brito, Executive Director,
California Reinvestment Coalition) (stressing the need “to ensure that community voices are not drowned out by
fabricated comments fraudulently submitted in favor of industry”); Bob Barr, Massive Fraud in Net Neutrality Process
Is a Crime Deserving of Justice Department Attention, MARIETTA DAILY J. (Dec. 25, 2017),
https://www.mdjonline.com/opinion/bob-barr-massive-fraud-in-net-neutrality-process-is-a-crime-deserving-ofjustice-department/article_87a01d86-e9c5-11e7-af34-3bc55501c7a0.html (“[B]efore too long, the voices of real
people, expressing genuine opinions on regulations, will be drowned out and ignored all together by those in power.”);
Eric T. Schneiderman, An Open Letter to the FCC, MEDIUM (Nov. 21, 2017),
https://medium.com/@NewYorkStateAG/an-open-letter-to-the-fcc-b867a763850a (objecting that “the perpetrator or
perpetrators attacked what is supposed to be an open public process by attempting to drown out and negate the views
of the real people, businesses, and others who honestly commented on this important issue”). 



"it may be difficult to disentangle a mass comment campaign
from a more spontaneous mass response."" (pg. 19) I solve this problem.

3 Bridget C.E. Dooling, Legal Issues in E-Rulemaking, 63 ADMIN. L. REV. 893, 901 n.33 (2011); Michael Herz,
“Data, Views, or Arguments”: A Rumination, 22 WM. & MARY BILL RTS. J. 351, 369-74 (2013); Tips for Submitting
Effective Comments, REGULATIONS.GOV (“The comment process is not a vote.”) (on file with authors) 
4 For example, in North Carolina Growers’ Ass’n v. United Farm Workers, the court found that a truncated comment
period with substantial content restrictions was inadequate, in part relying on the small number of comments received
compared to a prior related rulemaking. N.C. Growers’ Ass’n v. United Farm Workers, 702 F.3d 755, 770-71 (4th
Cir. 2012); see also California ex rel. Becerra v. U.S. Dep’t of the Interior, 381 F. Supp. 3d 1153, 1176-1178 (N.D.
Cal. 2019). Some courts have also looked to the number of comments received during the National Environmental
Policy Act review process to determine whether a project is “controversial” and therefore requires a full environmental
impact statement, although there is disagreement over the relevance of the scale of public reaction to that inquiry.
Sierra Club v. Bosworth, 510 F.3d 1016, 1032 (9th Cir. 2007) (“Given the large number of comments, close to 39,000,
and the strong criticism from several affected Western state agencies, we cannot summarily conclude that the effects
of the Fuels CE are not controversial.”); Greenpeace Action v. Franklin, 14 F.3d 1324, 1333-34 (9th Cir. 1992) (noting
that an “outpouring of public protest” along with a “substantial dispute . . . as to size, nature, or effect” of a proposed
action can demonstrate that the action is controversial and therefore requires an EIS (citations omitted)); Emily M.
Slaten, Note, “We Don’t Fish in Their Oil Wells, and They Shouldn’t Drill in Our Rivers”: Considering Public
Opposition Under NEPA and the Highly Controversial Regulatory Factor, 43 IND. L. REV. 1319 (2010). 

The court followed up by stating that just
because numerous people “share the same opinion and pooled their efforts does not undermine
their intended show of support.”76 
76 Id. Morales v. Lyng, 702 F. Supp. 161 (N.D. Ill. 1988) also discusses the role of form comments. In this case, the
Department of Agriculture was found to have acted in an arbitrary and capricious manner by choosing to generally
ignore certain comments. The Secretary of Agriculture argued that the ignored comments were “endless clones of
conclusory statements.” Id. at 163. However, the court found that by choosing to ignore these comments that offered
a differing view than that chosen by the agency, the agency had impermissibly “failed to consider important aspects
of the administrative record and hence the issue itself.” Id. 



PAPER IDEA - FIND POLLS - ASK BRAD
"Inasmuch as public opinion is relevant for a rulemaking, comments generally do not
provide a reliable metric of the views of the broader public. Commenters are an entirely selfselected group, and there is no reason to believe that they are in any way representative of the
larger public. Relatedly, the group of commenters may represent a relatively privileged group, with
less advantaged members of the public less likely to engage in this form of political participation."



INFLUENCE 
 An important early paper by Marissa
Golden found that business interests tended to dominate the rulemaking process, but that the
overall influence of comments was low.80 Subsequent work has found that, at least under certain
conditions, agencies sometimes do make changes in response to comments.81 Among the factors
that have been found to affect commenter influence is the degree of sophistication in the comments
and the source of the comment.82 Studies of mass commenting in particular have found that
agencies tend to be less responsive to mass comment campaigns,83 and to refer to the number of
comments received in favor of or in opposition to a rule in opportunistic ways.84 Some have argued
that the reality that agencies are unlikely to alter rules in response to less substantive comments provides a reason to discourage, or at least “not actively facilitate public participation” of this
sort. (pg. 21-22)

Farina et al., supra note 50, at 150 (“A democratic government should not actively facilitate public participation
that it does not value.”). 


Mariano-Florentino Cuéllar, Rethinking Regulatory Democracy, 57 ADMIN. L. REV. 411 (2005) (identify three
instances in which agencies modified proposals in light of submissions from non-business commenters); Jason Webb
Yackee & Susan Webb Yackee, A Bias Towards Business? Assessing Interest Group Influence on the U.S.
Bureaucracy, 68 J. POL. 128, 133–35 (2006) (finding that agencies consistently alter proposals to reflect comments
from business interests but not others). One article observes: “The relatively high value placed on hard data in
comments is best summed up by the interviewee who stated, ‘We look at every comment; we consider every comment.
But unless there is data supporting the position, it’s just not that useful in the rulemaking process.’” Keith Naughton
et al., Understanding Commenter Influence During Agency Rule Development, 28 J. POL’Y ANALYSIS & MGMT. 258,
270 (2009).
83 Balla et al., supra note 1 (finding that agencies give mass comments limited attention in the preambles to final rules
and that “regulations are generally not consistent with changes requested in comments, a lack of association that holds
especially for mass comment campaigns.”). Some observers have identified cases where mass comments (at least
arguably) influenced regulatory outcomes. See Lauren Moxley, E-Rulemaking and Democracy, 68 ADMIN. L. REV.
661, 692–95 (2016) (attributing change in FCC’s 2015 final net neutrality rule to large number of and consensus
among commenters).
84 See Herz, supra note 73, at 372–73 (“When [the agencies’] conclusion has strong support in the [mass] comments
they tend to note that fact, and when it does not they tend to glide over it.”); Parrillo, Should the Public Get to
Participate, supra note 18, at 71. 



Direct influence may not be the only motivation behind comments, and advocacy groups
may solicit mass comments for many different reasons. Research on mass comment campaigns
suggests that that different groups carry out such campaigns to promote a range of goals, including
calling public attention to a rulemaking.86 Others have pointed to internal organizational goals,
such as increasing membership and financial contribution and moving members up the “ladder of
engagement” towards greater involvement, as a motivation for efforts to mobilize actions like
petition-signing and sending public comments.87
Scholars have identified several potential problems with mass comment campaigns. Some
have argued that they may be used to distort regulators’ perception of public opinion, and may
lead to agency cynicism about the public comment process.88 Mass comment campaigns often
involve many duplicate, or near duplicate comments.89 Such duplicate comments impose various
85 Farina et al., supra note 50, at 150 (“A democratic government should not actively facilitate public participation
that it does not value.”).
86 Steven J. Balla et al., Where’s the Spam? Interest Groups and Mass Comment Campaigns in Agency Rulemaking,
11 POL’Y & INTERNET 460 (2019). Balla et al. find that that campaigns organized by regulated entities are more
substantive than campaigns organized by regulatory beneficiaries. Regulatory beneficiaries sponsored 73% of mass
comment campaigns analyzed (87% of campaigns with 1000+ comments), whereas regulated entities sponsored 27%
of mass comment campaigns (13% of those over 1000 comments). Campaigns sponsored by regulatory beneficiaries
were larger, averaging 15,783 comments, whereas those by regulated entities received an average of 4,345 comments.
Regulatory beneficiaries stated in interviews that during the Obama administration mass comment campaigns were
used to help the EPA justify proposed actions, whereas during the Trump-era the campaigns were used to cause the
administration to “feel pain” in the media and public opinion. Regulated entities, on the other hand, stated in interviews
that they use mass comment campaigns to try and counterbalance the mobilization by regulatory beneficiaries.
87 Farina, supra note 50, at 141; David Karpf, Online Political Mobilization from the Advocacy Group’s Perspective:
Looking Beyond Clicktivism, 2 POL’Y & INTERNET 1, 35 (2010) (“[Organizations use] email to mobilize member
interest around their top campaign priority, as a first step in a ladder-of-engagement.”); Shulman, supra note 77, at
27-30.
88 Sara R. Jordan & K. Lee Watson, Reexamining Rulemaking in an Era of Internet-Enabled Participation, 42 PUB.
PERFORMANCE & MGMT. REV. 836, 856 (2019) (“At the level of regulatory politics, manufactured salience is the
generation by politically or economically motivated actors of a large number of comments . . . in order to alter the
perceptions of regulators’ ascribed level of salience of a position on a rule.”); David Schlosberg et al., Deliberation in
E-Rulemaking? The Problem of Mass Participation, in ONLINE DELIBERATION: DESIGN, RESEARCH, AND PRACTICE
133, 143 (Todd Davies & Seeta Peña Gangadharan eds., 2009) (“Interviews with agency rule writers show that
agencies do not value and often openly resent form letters. The EPA, in fact, simply prints and stores an inaccessible
hard copy of all but one example of each identical or similar mass email.”); Stuart W. Shulman, The Internet Still
Might (But Probably Won’t) Change Everything, 1 I/S 111, 111–12 (2005) (raising concern that agency personnel
would become cynical about mass comment campaign).
89 Stuart Shulman, Whither Deliberation? Mass E-Mail Campaigns and U.S. Regulatory Rulemaking, 3 J. E-GOV’T
41, 58 (2006) (finding that very small percentage of mass campaign-generated comments include unique substantive
information); see also Cary Coglianese, Citizen Participation in Rulemaking: Past, Present, and Future, 55 DUKE L.J.
943, 952–59 (2006) (raising concern that e-rulemaking will increase number of comments but not range of
viewpoints).


INTERVIEWS WITH AGENCIES (pg. 23)
e three approaches taken by different
agencies: (a) opinions expressed in comments are irrelevant—only the factual content matters; (b)
opinions expressed in comments are relevant to the political perception of the rule and may affect
agencies’ activities on the Hill, color how agency leadership thinks about the viability of a
proposed rule, or affect how agencies roll out a rule if there is significant opposition; and (c)
opinions expressed in comments are relevant insofar as they express popular sentiment, and agency
decision makers (especially agency leadership) may consider that in deciding how to proceed




FAKE COMMENTS 
LEGAL ISSUES
MASS FAKES ARE LESS OF A PROBLEM THAN DEEP SOPHISTICATED FAKES:
"Perhaps the most potentially problematic malattributed comment would be a bespoke,
sophisticated comment rather than a mass comment that happens to have a phony name. Consider
a comment that purports to come from the General Counsel of a leading industry player or the head
of a prominent civil rights organization and reads as if it could be legitimate. Such a “deep fake”
comment could sow confusion at the agency and among other commenters and prompt a perceived
need among other stakeholders to respond." (32)"

POLICY ISSUES 
"the agency might be misled as to public
opinion, mistakenly viewing the phony comments as indicators of broader public support for a
particular position than actually exists."

"Now suppose the name is one that someone in the agency recognizes. This is the “deep
fake” scenario described above. For example, it may be an important researcher or advocate in a
relevant field, or the general counsel of a prominent regulated entity. In this situation, the identity
of the commenter may matter for the agency’s deliberations. The agency could give particular
weight to such a comment. But it would be highly unlikely for the falsehood to go unnoticed. The
very background knowledge that makes the name recognizable will make it hard for someone to
pull the deception off. This is especially the case in a situation where the purported commenter’s
interests are well known to the agency, perhaps because of repeat interaction. However, for an
agency that does not regulate often, or that regulates only in certain domains infrequently, this
might be harder to ensure. "


Also, regulations.gov now includes a comment application programming interface (API)
to allow authorized entities to post mass comment campaigns to Regulations.gov if they have been
verified by GSA using a commercial identity validation service. In the press release announcing
these changes, GSA indicated that this was “to assure such entities ‘are who they say they are.’”133 







