<!--  ### Identifying coalitions using clustering methods

I use statistical models of text to classify comments into coalitions. I cluster
documents by the frequency with which they use different words. Being
classified together does not mean that the documents all address the same distribution of substantive issues, just that they use similar
words relative to the full set of documents. I start by modeling all
comments on each rule (collapsing identical comments to one document)
with two and three clusters, which I then inspect to see how well the
comments of named organizations were classified. If the two-cluster model most sensibly describes the conflict, I label these clusters "pro" and "con" If the three-cluster model more sensibly describes the
conflict, I label these clusters as "pro, con, other." If neither fits
well, I increase the number of clusters as needed.

"`{r kmeans, fig.cap = "K-means clustering fails to capture coalitions when nearly all comments oppose a regulation"}

knitr::include_graphics(here::here("Figs", "kmeans.png"))
```


The asymmetry in expressed support for most rules presents challenges
for unsupervised clustering because much of the variation in comment
texts is within-coalition variation. For example, one of the most common
clustering methods, k-means clustering, often captures within-coalition
variation. Figure \@ref(fig:kmeans) shows k-means clusters based on a normalized
measure of word frequency (term-frequency/inverse-document-frequency)
compared to two principal components of variation. Neither k-means nor
principal components analysis is well suited to identifying the small
number of comments supporting the Park Service's proposed restrictions
on protests in Washington DC.

Two strategies may improve clustering. First, even partial text reuse
generally indicates that comments belong to the same coalition. For
example, as seen at the top of Figure
\@ref(fig:kmeans), models may be restricted to cluster the large number of comments beginning with
"As a citizen who has frequently participated" in the same coalition
even if they go on to add different personal anecdotes about why protest
rights are important to them. Thus, clustering methods could be
restricted to group partially copied texts, as well as entirely copied
texts. Second, a Bayesian mixture model may better recover pro and con
clusters, especially with strong priors comments using positive and
negative sentiment words belong together.
-->